# Questions

* Are there any sources or work available how the ethical principles can be practically applied in the real world in concrete software (AI) projects?
* Technology can help to take over repeating tasks and free time to human caretakers and doctors to take care and listen to their patient. Is this already notable in today hospitals?
* I believe that psychological health, belief and will are important parts of fighting deseases. Is there any scientific work to support that? And if so, should an artificial intelligence use related parameters for decision making ? I assume, that these parameters are usually not taken into account.
* Ethics is neglected in various areas. How could you create more awareness for this topic?
* I am curious about her standpoint or prediction about my question above: How can ethics become a part of IT (in a way like politics try to establish laws to abolish injustice due to racism and sexism), if that is possible, and what are the first side effects that come to your mind?
* Would a completly automated medical systems be possible, especially considering the missing empathy and doctor-patient relationship ?
* I would like to ask Jun.-Prof. Dr. Susanne Michl, if she thinks it might be possible to fully implement ethical principles into system or even build ML systems that can learn ethical guidelines, such that these systems become ethical experts by themselves?
* When talking about Interactive Intelligent Systems, one realizes how difficult it is to teach an AI to act ethically. Are there any tools or approaches to ensure that an AI follows ethical guidelines?
* Where did you acquire your ethics and medical knowledge? Was it difficult to transition from history and romanistics to medical ethics?
* Do you personally believe, that someday AI technologies can fully replace human interaction in difficult decision-making situations. In other words, will we at some point in time be able to blindly trust in the systems we develop?
* Ethical issues are really a complex topic, since it is combines with social values, and sometimes even combined with political issues. But we are kind of aware that someone the scientific research sacrifices ethical values. To what extent is the sacrifice allowed? For example for medical research or medical experiences, is there any compromised solution between data science practices and ethical issues suah as experiments on "little white mice" in medicine research?
* As reflected in the COVID-19, different governments have different measurements based on their political/ethical values. Conflicting values may make the coorporation across countries difficult. In clinical AI system, do you think the conflicting ethical value assessments will hinder the future international medical cooperation?