# Summaries: Ethics

The lecture was about artificial intelligence in medicine. Prof. Michl divided the lecture into three sections: In the first section she gave a general overview about theoretical works and discussions in ethics. She gave an overview of principles in ethics and what role ethics already played in medicine in the history. She explained out that since the 1960's there is an increased attention of companies paying attention to adopt the principles of ethics notable. She she pointed out that there is a huge gap between the theoretical principles and the practical application of these. Furthermore Prof. Michl showed with the help a diagram that our knowledge about the consequences of new technologies increase over while the flexibility to change established technologies decrease. As an example she gave the X-ray radiation.

In the section section she introduced the actors in the field of medicine ethics and technology. The actors humans and machines and out definition of trust and interaction with these actors played an important role in this section. As an example she asked about a situation where a patient gets a diagnose from a doctor but asks to get the diagnose from the machine.

In the third section Prof. Michls provided us one examples from the real world: Aspire Health, an AI service which predicts the remaining time a seriously sick patient will live. With these example she showcased the important role of ethics in the development of AI systems.

***

The lecture dealt with the use of artificial intelligence in human medicine as well as resulting ethical concerns and possible chances. Professor Michl described how our knowledge about the consequences of a technology increases over time but at the same time the possibility to shape and change established technologies decreases. Because of that, it is important to think about a system's impact and ethical concerns at an early stage. The field of tension between automatisation and autonomy was discussed as well as the role of autonomous systems. Professor Michl described autonomous systems as moral actors that have to conform to moral and etchical principles. Using a dialog system for radiology as an example, she showed that technical requirements might not fit what is actually needed in practice, highlighting the importance of taking context information into account. Professor Michl continued, by talking about human-machine-relationhships. For this, she introduced responsibility as an ethical principle and trust as a social phenomenon. Different kinds of trust were introduced, how a person's face can increase the trust in a system that they stand for. Professor Michl presented many questions that help to critically think about an intelligent system (from an ethical point of view). These questions relate to the knowledge that is generated by a system and whether the gernerated knowledge really helps to make better decisions. She explained how narrative-based decision making process plays an important role in finding consensus between all steakholders in a clinical context. She continued by talking about algorithmic decision making in uncertain situations and potential risks. The lecture was closed by a discussion on an intelligent system that supports deciding on whether a person should get a curative or palliative therapy.

***
The guest lecture of Prof. Susanne Michl focused on artificial intelligence and the human-machine interaction from an ethical perspective. The lecture was splitted into 3 parts which covered historical classification of ethics, ethical relevant relationship context between human and machine and at the end which use of technologies in which context and to what extent are clinically and ethically useful, as well as the influence of data-based health care on different contexts.

The area of ​​ethics has been developing steadily since the 1960s and today there are already many guidelines and principles that make it possible to facilitate and improve human-machine interaction. An ethical approach to the development and deployment of algorithms, data and AI requires clarity and consensus on ethical concepts and resolution of tensions between values, that is why AI ethics must move beyond lists of principles. AI is only as good as the data behind it, and as such, this data must be fair and representativ.

Computer-automated systems are used by humans, and humans are expected to remain essential contributors to artificial systems and automated systems in the future. Humans will continue to teach machines to perform tasks, explain the outcomes, and maintain the responsible use of machines. In order for machines to learn new tasks, humans must teach them. Humans also need to track and explain the outcomes for continued learning and better performance.

AI is playing an increasingly important role in healthcare as well. AI software platforms are currently being developed or implemented for use in many targeted healthcare applications, including medical diagnostics, patient monitoring, and learning healthcare systems.

If you use AI systems to make e.g. diagnoses, many are not sure how trustworthy this is. But in the end the human-machine interaction comes into play again. Data-based decision-making can be of great help in a clinical context.


***

Michl's lecture focussed on AI being used for medical purposes. She started by first showing the development of discussions about the subject in the last decades, as the second part she then pointed at the actors involved and finished in the third part with examples, like "Aspire Health", a tool to predict the time a patient may remain alive.

The discussion about ethics concerning the advance of technologies used in health care is not new and started already in the last sixties, however the exponential rise of the capabilities of IT seems not to be taken into account accordingly. Michl pointed out that the aspect of human influence on computer-aided systems is to be not underestimated, as any tiny screw (so to say) is initially adjusted by one or some humans and prone to coincidences. Though AI is of great help, today it seems futuristic to think of it to be more than that.

***

The talk reflects on the importance of ethics for the development of Artificial Intelligence systems, by taking a closer look at their occurrence in the medical field and the ethical problems caused. This leads to the conclusion that while AI is a good solution for making diagnoses, it lacks human intuition for certain decision situations.

In the first part of the talk relevant aspects for ethical development are mentioned, such as implementing new behaviours instead of retrofitting ethical principles to a given behaviour (ethical shopping), refraining from using unsubstantiated ethical claims (ethical blue washing) and avoiding the usage of ethics against necessary legislations (ethical lobbying). It then raises the problem of ethical issues mostly occurring later in the developmental phase, when major changes can’t be easily implemented. Therefor more time has to be spent raising ethical problems as early as possible. Finally the focus shifts to ethical problems caused by the transition to automation in the medical field. It juxtaposes the old and new professional roles of medical practitioners by associating the prior with intuitive and empathetic procedures, while the latter is affiliated with technology-based procedures and finding correlations in data. This focus on data is described as being a key problem for certain decision situations, where higher success probabilities might suggest a false sense of safety for a procedure, or the fact, that value-based factors are being completely ignored by machines. This leads to the conclusion that while AI can be a good addition to the medical workflow, a fully autonomous artificial medical system is still a utopia.

***

The guest Lecture: "Artificial Intelligence and Human-Machine Interaction from an Ethical Perspective - A Utopian (and Dystopian) Look into the Future of Patient Care" was held by Jun.-Prof. Dr. Susanne Michl. The talk addressed the topic of ethics in the context of healthcare and patient care with a focus on the use of digital systems (e.g. ML systems, but also X-ray machines).

According to the structure of a play, Jun.-Prof. Dr. Susanne Michl organized her presentation in three parts: First a general overview and theoretical discussion of ethics (in a metaphorical sense as “introduction of the play”), second an description of the actors (i.e. humans, machines, etc. which are involved in the field of ethics) and last but not least the actual play (i.e. an insight of the current practical application of ethics within the field of healthcare).

More specifically, within the first section, Jun.-Prof. Dr. Susanne Michl gave a general definition of ethics, followed by a short historical account of the role that ethics has played and the problems that ethical experts had already been confronted with in the field of medicine in the past. In this context, she showed that today's ethical issues address problems that already existed in earlier times and for which solutions have already been discussed. In addition, she highlighted the increased attention paid to ethics since the 1960 and underlines this statement by showing a meta-study that identified over 84 currently existing guidelines on ethics, which were designed by a broad range of parties such as OpenAI and Google. She describes the gap between the described principle-based guidelines and the practical use of such guidelines. She makes clear that often the problem does not lie in the lack of principles or incorrectly defined guidelines, but rather in conflicting principles. In the context, she calls for flexible and reflective approaches, which need to take procedural, deliberative, context-sensitive, and creative aspects into account.

In the next section, she make concrete examples about what is meant by conflicting principles by introducing different actors in the field of ethics. One example she presents is the tension between the principal of human autonomy and the use and need for automated machine systems. When the human autonomy is replaced by a machine, she states that a renewed definition of interaction between humans and machines with a specific focus on trust and responsibility is decisive to build ethical systems.

The last section comes with the concrete example of Aspire Health, an AI system that predicts the time of death of seriously ill patients. By means of this application, Prof. Dr. Susanne Michl shows that how ML systems can change the role of humans and machines and the new ethical issues which arise in this context.

***

In her guest lecture, she presents the ethical perspective of artificial intelligence and human-machine interaction. The speaker is Prof. Susanne Michl, Junior Professor since 2017 for Medical Humanities and Medical Ethics at Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin. Her research focuses on the ethical consequences both retrospectively and in the future in human medicine. The guest lecture was delivered in three parts: First, the lecture is placed historically in the context of ethics. The second part focuses on the ethical relationship context between humans and machines. In the last part, the impact on data-based healthcare on different contexts is highlighted. The notion of ethics shopping is introduced, which describes the selection of the most appropriate guideline regarding human-AI interaction. Then, important aspects in human-AI interaction are delineated:

Procedural aspects describe the continuous adjustment of principles instead of a rigid alignment according to abstract principles,
Deliberative aspects denotes multidisciplinary perspectivation, i.e., the use of multiple cross-disciplinary perspectives,
Context-sensitive aspects are data about complex social contexts,
Creative aspects address the question of what future developments can be imagined,
Domain ethics combine possibilities of justification and principles with practical questions of orientation. The dilemma here: the ability to shape the development of technology is high, the knowledge about the consequences of the development of technology is low.

She then moves on to the model of division of labor, which contrasts with the model of support. Machines are increasingly used when treatments are repetitive. Target variables for the use of artificial intelligence in reporting, for example, are

Uniqueness, this is very rare in medicine,
Uniformity, captures the deviation from the structured procedure
Speed, as fast as possible, as slow as necessary Finally mentioned key concepts is responsibility as an ethical principle, as well as trust as a social phenomenon

***

The talk was about ethics in the context of human medicine with a focus on artificial intelligence. Professor Michl discussed possible future scenarios - negative as well as positive ones.
She started her presentation with giving us a basic understanding and the definition of ethics and outlining how the field evolved over time. She also put emphasis on explaining how ethics is linked to technology and why it is gaining importance. In that regard, she gave different examples and incorporated her own experience as a researcher. She then proceeded to talk about automation and the role of ethics in designing autonomous systems, giving examplas from the medical field and human-machine interaction. One of her examples illustrated how artificial intelligence systems could support clinical decision making and almost act like real people being part of a discussion round. She further talked about trust and how it is linked to ethics and responsibility and how the trust in technological systems can be increased. One of the last topics she adressed in her presentation was how technology will bring changes to workplaces and how the roles might shift when tasks are redifined and partially being taken over by artifical intelligence systems.
To sum it up, the lecture was really informative and engaging, giving a good introduction on the role of ethics in the development of technology and ended with a very insightful and active discussion.

***

The lecture was held by Jun.-Prof. Dr. Susanne Michl and covered the topic of AI and Human-Machine-Interaction from an ethical experience. As a structural metaphor, she chose phases of a play, structuring her presentation into three parts. First, she spoke fundamentally about the definition of ethics and the means by which ethics are evaluated. In this regard, she showed in a historical discourse how strongly the topic has gained in importance since the 1960s. In addition, she showed by means of a meta-study that there are now over 84 guidelines on ethics, which are drafted by companies such as Google and Microsoft.
Next, she explained that most guidelines are principle-based and that ethical problems usually arise from conflicting principles. As a solution approach, she explained that flexible/reflective approaches and tools are needed, which should consider procedural, deliberative, context-sensitive, and creative aspects of ethics.
In the next section, she talked about the areas where ethics are becoming more and more important. There she described a cycle between human autonomy, autonomous machine systems, automated human actions and machine automation as a model of division of labor/support. Based on this, she described the importance of rethinking these interactions, as these interactions may have major ethical consequences.In this context, the development and use of digital technologies are in a field of tension between responsibility and trust.
In the last section, Dr. Michl addressed the changes in knowledge production, agency, and role definitions that result from the development of new tools. It became clear that this raises a great many questions in the areas mentioned. In addition, role definitions are changing, since the tasks of, for example, medical professionals are also being altered as a result of the developments. She also cited the problems of AI in difficult therapeutic decision-making situations.

***

The presentation of Prof. Dr. Susanne Michl is about ethical issues surrouding human medicine. Prof. Dr. Susanne Michl structured her presentation into three sections using the metaphors from a play structur: (i) setting the stage: introduction of theoretical background of ethics (in particular bioethics); (ii) clear stage for actors: introduction of actors and their interactive relationship in the ethical context; (iii) start the play: ethical aspects and its influence on current medical/clinica practices from differenct perspectives.

First section introduces the historical and theoretical background of ethics (especially bioethics). She explained that most of these policies are based on principles but problems will come out when the ethical issue goes to two conflicting priciples for example as "no-damage" and "participation". Therefore, in order to bring the principles into practices, ethical justification is NOT needed for the individual principles and the duties derived from them, but for the weighting of the principles. We therefore need flexible, reflexive approaches and tools that take these considerations into account at a very early stage in technology development and design.

Second section considers human and machines as two leading roles in a human-machine system. Prof.Dr.Susanne Michl described the interactions of human autonomy, machine automation, autonomous machine systems and automated human actions in a reversible system of human machine symbios. We have to rethink the relationship and the relationship context of a two way model respectively regarding allocation as well as supportance. She then presented two ways of rethinking the human-machine interactions, respectively from micro- and macro views. The project DIAMED for structured reporting and diagnostic support in radiology is an example for rethinking a technical solution as a social-technical solution from a micro perspective (zoom-in), whereas rethinking the development and use of digital technologies in the area of tension between responsibility and trust deals with a macro perspective (zoom-out).

In the third section, Prof. Dr. Susanne Michl also provides two views to consider the ethical impacts on knowledge generation and on decision-making. Based on the two points of view, Prof. Dr. Susanne Michl shows that how human-AI system will change our understanding of roles in traditional models and how the human-AI symbios will trigger new difficulties in clinical decision processes.